What's new in .NET 11 – Preview 4 docs update (#53689)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/whats-new/dotnet-11/sdk.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 11 adds several `dotnet watch` improvements for long-running local development loops:
```

| linux-x64 | rpm | 165 | 122 | 26.0% |
| linux-x64 | containers | Varies | Varies | 8–17% |

> Preview 4 trims the SDK further by skipping crossgen for assemblies that only exist under `DotnetTools/`. Assemblies that also exist outside `DotnetTools/` are still crossgen'd—they get the startup benefit and the duplicate is then removed—but assemblies unique to `DotnetTools/` are left as IL-only. On a `linux-x64` build, this reduces the SDK tarball by an additional 23.6 MB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SDK is further trimmed because crossgen is skipped for assemblies that only exist under `DotnetTools/`. Assemblies that also exist outside `DotnetTools/` are still crossgen'd—they get the startup benefit and the duplicate is then removed—but assemblies unique to `DotnetTools/` are left as IL-only. On a `linux-x64` build, this reduces the SDK tarball by an additional 23.6 MB.
```

- **Crash recovery:** When the app crashes, `dotnet watch` automatically relaunches it on the next relevant file change.
- **Windows desktop support:** Ctrl+C handling is improved for Windows desktop apps such as Windows Forms and WPF.

> Preview 4 adds device selection for MAUI and mobile projects. After picking a target framework, `dotnet watch` calls the `ComputeAvailableDevices` MSBuild target, auto-selects when there's a single device, and shows an interactive picker with search when there are several. The chosen device flows through to `dotnet build` and the launched `dotnet run` subprocess, including a re-restore when the device requires a `RuntimeIdentifier` not present in the original restore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 11 also adds device selection for MAUI and mobile projects. After picking a target framework, `dotnet watch` calls the `ComputeAvailableDevices` MSBuild target, auto-selects when there's a single device, and shows an interactive picker with search when there are several. The chosen device flows through to `dotnet build` and the launched `dotnet run` subprocess, including a re-restore when the device requires a `RuntimeIdentifier` not present in the original restore.
```

To pre-select a device from the command line, use:

```bash
dotnet watch --device <device-id>
```

> Preview 4 also fixes several long-standing `dotnet watch` issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following long-standing `dotnet watch` issues are fixed:
```

- The framework selection prompt no longer appears stuck due to two readers both calling `Console.ReadKey()`.

> - Ctrl+C and Ctrl+R no longer surface a spurious `WebSocketException` or `ObjectDisposedException` when the WebSocket transport tears down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <kbd>Ctrl+C</kbd> and <kbd>Ctrl+R</kbd> no longer surface a spurious `WebSocketException` or `ObjectDisposedException` when the WebSocket transport tears down.
```

## Asset Groups for Static Web Assets

The Static Web Assets SDK adds support for **Asset Groups**, a way to declare groups of related assets that share publish, fingerprinting, and endpoint metadata. The related `DefineStaticWebAssetEndpoints` task gains an `AdditionalEndpointDefinitions` parameter, and the glob matcher exposes the captured `**` stem so additional endpoints (for example default-document routes like `/` for `**/index.html`) can be defined declaratively.

This is infrastructure for ASP.NET Core component authors and SDK extension authors. Most app developers see the result indirectly as Razor and Blazor component packages ship cleaner static-asset metadata.

## OpenTelemetry replaces Application Insights for CLI telemetry

The `dotnet` CLI now uses OpenTelemetry (OTel) with Azure Monitor and OTLP exporters for its opt-in telemetry, replacing the previous `Microsoft.ApplicationInsights` dependency. The user-facing behavior is unchanged—the same telemetry is collected with the same opt-out via `DOTNET_CLI_TELEMETRY_OPTOUT`. The motivation is to make the CLI NativeAOT-friendly.

## NativeAOT entry point for the dotnet CLI

> To enable near-instant startup for common CLI invocations, Preview 4 lays the groundwork for a NativeAOT-compiled `dotnet` CLI host. The work introduces three layers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable near-instant startup for common CLI invocations, .NET 11 lays the groundwork for a NativeAOT-compiled `dotnet` CLI host. The work introduces three layers:
```

The goal is near-instant startup for the most common CLI invocations while preserving full functionality for the rest. The new entry point isn't the default `dotnet` binary yet.

## Partial Ready-to-Run for upstack tooling

A new MSBuild property lets upstack tooling (for example, `dotnet/macios` and `dotnet/maui`) declare a list of assemblies to be partially R2R-compiled and excluded from the composite image. The motivating scenario is precompiling generated XAML code in Debug builds to speed up F5 without paying the full crossgen cost for the rest of the app. App developers don't set this property directly—it's a hook the mobile workloads use in their targets.

## Other CLI improvements

- `dotnet format` now accepts `--framework` for multi-targeted projects.
- `dotnet test` in Microsoft Testing Platform (MTP) mode now supports `--artifacts-path`.
- `dotnet tool exec` and `dnx` no longer prompt for an extra approval when running tools.
- `dotnet nuget <subcommand> --help` now correctly forwards to the NuGet CLI's help output instead of falling back to generic help.
- `dotnet publish` no longer removes native DLLs on subsequent runs of single-file publish.

## Breaking changes

> .NET 11 includes the following breaking changes in the SDK:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 11 includes some breaking changes in the SDK.
```
